<!--- Copyright 2002-2024 Thales Alenia Space
  Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
  you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
  You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
  distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
  WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
  See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
  limitations under the License.
-->

# Upgrading from Orekit 12.X to Orekit 13.0

Version 13.0 of Orekit introduced some incompatible API changes with respect
to versions 12.x. These changes are summarized in the following table. The next
paragraphs give hints about how users should change application source code to
adapt to this new version.

| change                                                                                                                                                                    | related issues                                                                                                                     |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [building FieldOrbit from Orbit](#Building_FieldOrbit_from_Orbit)                                                                                                         | [issue 1194](https://gitlab.orekit.org/orekit/-/issues/1194)                                                                       |
| [spacecraft state interpolator requires specifying interpolation method](#Spacecraft_state_interpolator_requires_specifying_interpolation_method)                         | [issue 1266](https://gitlab.orekit.org/orekit/-/issues/1266/)                                                                      |
| [building an AbsoluteDate from Instant is always in UTC time scale](#Building_an_AbsoluteDate_from_Instant_is_always_in_UTC_time_scale)                                   | [issue 1272](https://gitlab.orekit.org/orekit/-/issues/1272/)                                                                      |
| [position angles conversions moved](#Position_angles_conversions_moved)                                                                                                   | [issue 1275](https://gitlab.orekit.org/orekit/-/issues/1275/)                                                                      |
| [fitting of Earth Orientation Parameters](#Fitting_of_Earth_Orientation_Parameters)                                                                                       | [issue 1278](https://gitlab.orekit.org/orekit/-/issues/1278/)                                                                      |
| [tropospheric models revamped](#Tropospheric_models_revamped)                                                                                                             | [issue 1287](https://gitlab.orekit.org/orekit/-/issues/1287/)                                                                      |
| [empty cache without field argument](#Empty_cache_without_field_argument)                                                                                                 | [issue 1329](https://gitlab.orekit.org/orekit/-/issues/1329/)                                                                      |
| [signal time of flight needs a frame](#Signal_time_of_flight_needs_a_frame)                                                                                               | [issue 1332](https://gitlab.orekit.org/orekit/-/issues/1332/)                                                                      |
| [ambiguity handling in phase measurements](#Ambiguity_handling_in_phase_measurements)                                                                                     | [issue 1333](https://gitlab.orekit.org/orekit/-/issues/1333/)                                                                      |
| [clock offset applied flag in Rinex files](#Clock_offset_applied_flag_in_Rinex_files)                                                                                     | [issue 1341](https://gitlab.orekit.org/orekit/-/issues/1341/)                                                                      |
| [measurement generation returns EstimatedMeasurementBase](#Measurement_generation_now_returns_EstimatedMeasurementBase)                                                   | [issue 1350](https://gitlab.orekit.org/orekit/-/issues/1350/)                                                                      |
| [getPropagators replaced by getPropagatorsMap](#getPropagators_replaced_by_getPropagatorsMap)                                                                             | [issue 1370](https://gitlab.orekit.org/orekit/-/issues/1370/)                                                                      |
| [removal of PropagatorBuilder copy method](#Removal_of_PropagatorBuilder_copy_method)                                                                                     | [issue 1378](https://gitlab.orekit.org/orekit/-/issues/1378/)                                                                      |
| [frame guessing in IGS products](#Frame_guessing_in_IGS_products)                                                                                                         | [issue 1394](https://gitlab.orekit.org/orekit/-/issues/1394/)                                                                      |
| [Frequency replaced by RadioWave, GnssSignal, or PredefinedGnssSignal where relevant](#Frequency_replaced_by_RadioWave_GnssSignal_or_PredefinedGnssSignal_where_relevant) | [issue 1434](https://gitlab.orekit.org/orekit/-/issues/1434/), [issue 1456](https://gitlab.orekit.org/orekit/orekit/-/issues/1456) |
| [typo in PressureTemperatureHumidityProvider API](Typo_in_PressureTemperatureHumidityProvider_API)                                                                        | [issue 1447](https://gitlab.orekit.org/orekit/-/issues/1447/)                                                                      |
| [revamp of dates handling](#Revamp_of_dates_handling)                                                                                                                     | [issue 1454](https://gitlab.orekit.org/orekit/-/issues/1454/)                                                                      |
| [signal time of flight endpoints adjustment](#Signal_time_of_flight_endpoints_adjustment)                                                                                 | [issue 1468](https://gitlab.orekit.org/orekit/-/issues/1468/)                                                                      |


## Building FieldOrbit from Orbit

### overview of the change
In the 12.X series, two independent ways to convert an `Orbit` into a `FieldOrbit`
were set up. One was to use a new utility class `Fieldifier` and the second one
was to use a `convertToFieldOrbit` method from `OrbitType`. As this was redundant,
the utility method in `Fieldifier` was deprecated and the `convertToFieldOrbit`
method from `OrbitType` was kept. The deprecated method was removed in 13.0

### how to adapt existing source code
If users called the utility method in `Fieldifier`, they should now call the
method from `OrbitType`. This means replacing (taking a circular orbit as an
example):

```java
import org.orekit.orbits.FieldCircularOrbit;
import org.orekit.utils.Fieldifier;

final FieldCircularOrbit<T> fieldCircularOrbit = (FieldCircularOrbit<T>) Fieldifier.fieldify(field, circularOrbit);
```
by
```java
final FieldCircularOrbit<T> fieldCircularOrbit = (FieldCircularOrbit<T>) circularOrbit.getType().convertToFieldOrbit(field);
```

## Spacecraft state interpolator requires specifying interpolation method

### overview of the change
In the 12.X series, it was possible to build a `SpacecraftStateInterpolator` without
specifying the number of interpolation points or the threshold. In this case, it
used the default values. This could generate exceptions if the associated interpolators
for orbit, mass, attitude… did not use the same default values. The constructor was
deprecated in 12.0 and a new constructor added with settings for number of interpolation
points and threshold. The deprecated constructor was removed in 13.0

### how to adapt existing source code
If user code called the `SpacecraftStateInterpolator` without specifying the number of
interpolation points or the threshold, it should now add these parameters explicitly,
using `AbstractTimeInterpolator.DEFAULT_INTERPOLATION_POINTS` and
`AbstractTimeInterpolator.DEFAULT_EXTRAPOLATION_THRESHOLD_SEC`.

## Building an AbsoluteDate from Instant is always in UTC time scale

### overview of the change
In the 12.X series, it was possible to build an `AbsoluteDate` from a
`java.time.Instant`, specifying an arbitrary time scale. This was not
compliant with the `Instant` API which requires using UTC. A constructor
using only the `Instant` was added in 12.1 as well as a constructor with
at time scale that is enforced to be UTC. The constructor with
`Instant` and `TimeScale` was deprecated. The deprecated constructor
was removed in 13.0.

### how to adapt existing source code

If the constructor with a `Instant` and `TimeScale` was used and the
time scale was already UTC, then there is nothing to do. If the time
scale was not UTC, then the semantics must be revised by users, as they
did violate `Instant` API, so they probably need to check how the
`Instant` is produced, to ensure it is really in UTC.

## Position angles conversions moved

### overview of the change
In the 12.X series, position angles in orbits (anomalies for `{Field}KeplerianOrbit`,
latitude arguments for `{Field}CircularOrbit`, longitude arguments for
`{Field}EquinoctialOrbit`) could be converted between their `MEAN`, `TRUE` and
`ECCENTRIC` flavors using static methods in the orbit classes themselves. These static
have been moved to dedicated utility classes `{Field}KeplerianAnomalyUtility`,
`{Field}CircularAnomalyUtility`, and `{Field}EquinoctialAnomalyUtility` as of version
12.1. The methods in the orbit classes have been deprecated in 12.1 and removed
in 13.0.

### how to adapt existing source code

As the methods are static ones, just the name of the class providing the
methods should be changed. This means replacing (taking circular orbit
and conversion from `ECCENTRIC` to `TRUE` as an example):
```java
final double alphaV = CircularOrbit.eccentricToTrue(ex, ey, alphaE);
```
by
```java
final double alphaV = CircularLatitudeArgumentUtility.eccentricToTrue(ex, ey, alphaE);
```

## Fitting of Earth Orientation Parameters

### overview of the change
In the 12.X series, Fitting of Earth Orientation Parameters was introduced.
This was initially configured using a fitting duration as well as an exponential
weight with a time constant, starting with small weights at the beginning of the
fitting duration and increasing weights afterwards. However, this led to numerical
errors in some configurations. A new configuration was then used, starting from
the last known EOP and decreasing weights when going towards past. The fitting
duration was therefore ignored as the exponential decrease made it useless. The
corresponding constructor was deprecated. This deprecated constructor was removed
in 13.0.

### how to adapt existing source code
If users called the `SingleParameterFitter` with a fitting duration, they should
just remove this parameter; anyway it was ignored since 12.0.1, so this should
not have any influence.

## Tropospheric models revamped

### overview of the change

In the 12.X series, tropospheric models implemented the `DiscreteTroposphericModel`
interface. This interface used constant temperature pressure and hygrometry but
variable location, which was inconsistent. It did not allow to use models that
are azimuth-dependant (slanted atmosphere layers). It also used inconsistent non-SI
units. The interface was completely rewritten as `TroposphericModel` in 12.1, and
the existing models were rewritten to implement the new interfaces. A new `GroundStation`
constructor was added that references a `PressureTemperatureHumidityProvider` that
will be used to provide weather parameters to measurements performed by the station.
The older tropospheric model interface, the former models implementations and the
`GroundStation` constructor without provider were deprecated. In version 13.0,
the deprecated interface, implementations and constructor were all removed.

### how to adapt existing source code

All the tropospheric models available in Orekit 12.X are still available, sometimes
with different names (for example `MariniMurrayModel` is now called `MariniMurray`,
`SaastamoinenModel` is now `ModifiedSaastamoinenModel`, but there is also a
`CanonicalSaastamoinenModel`) and different constructors. Some models allow passing
a `PressureTemperatureHumidityProvider` to the constructor, which allows to retrieve
time and location-dependent weather parameters. Several new tropospheric models
have been added in the process. `AngularTroposphericDelayModifier` was also discovered
to be seriously flawed and has been replaced by `AngularRadioRefractionModifier`.

Users should review the models they use and adapt the class names as well as the
new constructor parameters. If they used a simple configuration with fixed weather
parameters, they can use either `ConstantPressureTemperatureHumidityProvider` or
`TroposphericModelUtils.STANDARD_ATMOSPHERE_PROVIDER` (or
`TroposphericModelUtils.STANDARD_ATMOSPHERE` if they need the constant values
and not the provider). For better representativity, it is suggested to use either
a global model like `GlobalPressureTemperature3` or to implement
`PressureTemperatureHumidityProvider` with a custom class downloading real
measured data.

## Empty cache without field argument

### overview of the change
In the 12.X series, the `ImmutableFieldTimeStampedCache.emptyCache` had a
field argument which was in fact ignored. This method has been deprecated
in 12.1 and a new method without any argument added. The deprecated method
was removed in 13.0

### how to adapt existing source code
If users called `ImmutableFieldTimeStampedCache.emptyCache` with a field
argument, they should just remove the argument at the call site.

## Signal time of flight needs a frame

### overview of the change
In the 12.X series, the `AbstractMeasurement` method `signalTimeOfFlight` only
used a `TimeStampedPVCoordinates` without care about the frame it refered too. An
additional signature was added, using a `PVCoordinatesProvider`, which required
specifying the frame. For consistency, the frame was also added in the
`TimeStampedPVCoordinates` version and the method without the frame was deprecated.
The deprecated method was removed in 13.0.

### how to adapt existing source code
If user code called `signalTimeOfFlight` without a frame, it should now also
pass the frame in the arguments list.

## Ambiguity handling in phase measurements

### overview of the change
In the 12.X series, the phase measurements (both ground measurements and inter-satellite
measurements) managed one ambiguity parameter for each measurement, and in addition there
were dedicated modifiers for the same purpose. This was cumbersome and wasted a lot of
resources since numerous parameter drivers where create and should be managed together
as they share the same name. An `AmbiguityCache` has been set up to drastically reduce
the number of parameter drivers (allowing to use only one driver for each
emitter/receiver/wavelength triplet) and could be passed to the measurements constructors.
This cache holds `AmbiguityDriver` entries that are specialized `ParameterDriver`.
The constructor without the ambiguity cache were deprecated and a temporary default cache
was made available and used by these deprecated constructors. As with this change the
phase measurements managed the ambiguity by themselves, the additional modifiers were
also deprecated. All deprecated constructors and classes were removed in 13.0, as well
as the temporary default cache.

### how to adapt existing source code
In order to build phase measurements, users should set up one instance of an ambiguity
cache on their own (just calling `new AmbiguityCache()`) and pass it as an argument
to the phase measurements constructors (or the phase measurements builders constructors
in the measurement generation use case). The cache will be populated automatically as
measurements are created. The ambiguities can be retrieved either from the measurements
themselves (using the `getAmbiguityDriver` method) or from the cache, given the emitter,
receiver and wavelength.

## Clock offset applied flag in Rinex files

### overview of the change
In the 12.X series, the `RCV CLOCK OFFS APPL` flag in Rinex observation files was
parsed as an integer, despite it really has the semantic of a flag. This was confusing
as a numerical value could lead people to think it was really the offset itself that
was stored there, when in fact the offset is present in the observations. The
integer-based getter and setters were deprecated in 12.1 and new boolean-based getters
and setters were added. The deprecated getters and setters were removed in 13.0.

### how to adapt existing source code
If users called `setClkOffset` or `getClkOffset`, they should replace these calls
by the boolean versions `setClockOffsetApplied` and `getClockOffsetApplied`.

## Measurement generation now returns EstimatedMeasurementBase

### overview of the change
In the 12.X series, the `build` method in `MeasurementBuilder<T>` interface from
package `org.orekit.estimation.measurements.generation` did return an
object of type `T`, where `T` was the parameterized type in `MeasurementBuilder<T>`
and extended `ObservedMeasurement<T>`.

Returning only the observed value was limiting as users may sometimes need
access to the complete states that were used during the generation. These states
were in fact computed internally and discarded after the observed measurement
was produced. The rationale of this change was to allow retrieving these
complete states.

Starting with version 13.0 the return type of the `build` method was therefore
changed to `EstimatedMeasurementBase<T>`.

### how to adapt existing source code

If the additional information is relevant to the caller application, then users
should change the type of the variable they use to store the estimated measurement
and use it. This means replacing
```java
final T built = builder.build(date, interpolators);
```
by
```java
final EstimatedMeasurementBase<T> built = builder.build(date, interpolators);
```

If the additional information is not relevant to the caller application, then users
can just extract the observed measurement from the estimated measurement.
This means replacing
```java
final T built = builder.build(date, interpolators);
```
by
```java
final T built = builder.build(date, interpolators).getObservedMeasurement();
```

## getPropagators replaced by getPropagatorsMap

### overview of the change
In the 12.X series, `AggregateBoundedPropagator.getPropagators` method rebuilt
the map each time it was called. It was deplrecated and replaced by a
`getPropagatorsMap` method that retruend the same map each call. The deprecated
method was removed in 13.0

### how to adapt existing source code
User code should just adapt the method name at call site.

## Removal of PropagatorBuilder copy method

### overview of the change
In 12.X series, the `PropagatorBuilder.copy()` method was deprecated and replaced
by the `.clone()` method available natively in Java. The deprecated method was removed in 13.0

### how to adapt existing source code
The change is straightforward. Users only have to replace

```java
import org.orekit.propagation.conversion.AbstractPropagatorBuilder;

final AbstractPropagatorBuilder newBuilder = builder.copy();
```
by
```java
final AbstractPropagatorBuilder newBuilder = builder.clone();
```

## Frame guessing in IGS products

### overview of the change
In the 12.X series, frames guessing in IGS products like SP3 or Rinex files
was flawed. It misses several cases and returned a default Earth frame that
could be wrong. A more general utility method `IGSUtils.guessFrame` was introduced.
This method complies with more classical denominations used by IGS laboratories
and also allows as an extension to use a few non-rotating frames as used in some
industrial teams. The `SP3Parser.guessFrame` method and `SP3Parser.SP3_FRAME_CENTER_STRING`
constant were deprecated. The deprecated items were removed in 13.0.

### how to adapt existing source code
If user codes did call `SP3Parser.guessFrame`, they should call instead `IGSUtils.guessFrame`.

## Frequency replaced by RadioWave, GnssSignal, or PredefinedGnssSignal where relevant

### overview of the change
In the 12.X series, numerous classes and methods in the library used the
enumerates `Frequency` and `ObservationType` from package `org.orekit.gnss`
directly. These enumerates listed the predefined frequencies and observable
that are used by the existing GNSS systems (GPS, Glonass, Galileo, Beidou,
QZSS, IRNSS, SBAS).

Enumerates are fine when dealing with existing systems supported by Orekit,
but they are not sufficient when designing new navigation systems using new
frequencies or new observables. The rationale of this change was to allow using
custom frequencies and observation types. The naming convention for the first
enumerate was also awkward as the name `Frequency` was too generic and therefore
confusing and as the API also  provided access to other elements (like wavelength,
common frequency multiplier, and name). A last problem with the enumerates API was
that it used non-SI units (MHz instead of Hz for frequency).

This change was introduced in two steps, one that did not break the API
and was introduced in version 12.1 and one that did break the API and was
introduced in version 13.0.

Starting with version 12.1, several methods of this enumerate where moved
upward in new interface `GnssSignal` and its superinterface `RadioWave`.
This had no consequence on users source code. Starting with version 13.0,
the `Frequency` enumerate was renamed `PredefinedGnssSignal` and numerous
methods that did reference were changed to reference either `RadioWave`,
`GnssSignal`, or `PredefinedGnssSignal`. The `ObservationType` was also
changed to be an interface and a new enumerate `PredefinedObservationType`
was introduced.

As long as only enumerates were used, relying on the equality operator `==`
to compare a predefined signal with a reference was relevant. It is not relevant
anymore when using interfaces implemented by custom user classes. Two
predicate methods, `closeTo(other)` and `closeTo(other, tolerance)` have
therefore been added to the new `RadioWave` interface to check if frequencies
are close enough. The first  method uses a default tolerance of 1 mHz, which is
good enough for most purposes.

A few method names have been changed according to their return types,
for example `getFrequencies()` in `Antenna` has been renamed `getRadioWaves()`,
`getFrequency()` in `ObservationType` has been renamed `getSignal()`,
and `getSignal()` in `BeidouCivilianNavigationMessage` has been renamed
`getRadioWave()`.

The Rinex parser and writer API have been extended to allow these new signals
and observation types ot be used in Rinex files. Note however that as these
elements are non-standard, the files produced may be impossible to read with
applications that do not rely on Orekit for parsing.

### how to adapt existing source code

In most cases, as the interfaces are just higher level abstractions of the
same concept that was already implemented by the `Frequency` enumerate,
users can just change the types of the objects they use to either
`PredefinedGnssSignal`, `GnssSignal` or `RadioWave` depending on the method.
Sometimes the type appears in a parameterized type, so for example the
`ReceiverAntenna` constructor now requires a `Map<RadioWave, FrequencyPattern>`
instead of a `Map<Frequency, FrequencyPattern>`. Such types changes in methods
signatures and field types are sufficient if the only methods used in the
enumerate were `getName()` or `getRatio()` (which are defined in `GnssSignal`)
or if they were `getFrequency()` or `getWavelength()` (which are defined in
`RadioWave`). Note that `getMHzFrequency()` has been replaced by `getFrequency()`
which returns a predefinedGnssSignal in Hz and not in MHz anymore, for consistency with
Orekit convention to use SI units everywhere.

As explained above, if the enumerate was used directly with an equality
operator to check against some predefined value, this check should be
changed to a proximity check by calling one of the `closeTo` methods.

The call sites for methods that have changed names must be adapted to use
the new names.

## Typo in PressureTemperatureHumidityProvider API

### overview of the change
The `PressureTemperatureHumidityProvider` interface introduced in 12.0
defines two methods with name `getWeatherParamerers`, which was a typo.
The error was fixed and the name was changed to `getWeatherParameters` in 13.0.

### how to adapt existing source code
The change is straightforward. Users only have to replace calls to `getWeatherParamerers`
by calls to `getWeatherParameters`.

## Revamp of dates handling

### overview of the change
In the 12.X series, dates were implemented using an epoch as a whole number of seconds from
a reference date and a double offset corresponding to the fractional parts of the seconds.
As the fractional part was between 0.0 and 1.0, its resolution was of the order of magnitude
of a femtosecond near 1.0, and when dates resulted from successive computations (typically
sequences of calls to `shiftedBy`), accuracies at picoseconds level could be regularly
achieved. There were however rounding problems when either dates were output in textual
form with decimal digits, either because writing for safe roundtrip operations induced writing
many spurious digits, or because writing with reasonable digits numbers (say down to millisecond
or microseconds) prevented safe roundtrip operations. Another type of problems occurred when
standard java `Instant`, `Date` or `TimeUnit` were used as  they refer to milliseconds,
microseconds or nanoseconds. Yet another problem was when TT (Terrestrial Time) scale was used,
as its offset with respect to TAI (International Atomic Time) is 32.184s exactly and 0.184 cannot
be represented exactly as an IEEE754 primitive double (the closest normal number that can be
represented exactly is $\frac{3314649325744685}{2^{54}}$, which is about 3.11 attoseconds smaller).

There were also several problems with the linear models between UTC and TAI that were used
before 1972, as the offset was a whole number of microseconds and the slope were a whole
number of nanoseconds per seconds. Supporting properly the linear models before 1972 may
seem moot but is in fact really required because many systems use Unix time so it is
widely used in interfaces or databases. The official Unix time as defined by POSIX does
*not* consider leap seconds, but many users ignore it and will just use
`new ApsoluteDate(1970, 1, 1, utc)` and expect this to be seamlessly interoperable with
standard java `Instant`, `Date` or `TimeUnit`. It is not fully possible but at least
roundtrip conversions between the two representations, with and without leap seconds,
should remain safe. Unfortunately the 1970-01-01 epoch is located in a four years time
range (from 1968 to 1972) during which the offset between UTC and TAI exhibited a 30 ns/s slope.
This induced a 378691200 ns offset as of 1970-01-01 (to be added to the 4213170 µs
offset that was active on 1968-01-01) and the slope continued to be applied for two years
later. This complicates a safe roundtrip conversion.

In order to alleviate these problems, dates handling has been thoroughly revamped. The whole
number of seconds is still stored as signed primitive long like it was before, so the range of
dates that can be represented is still ±292 billion years for `AbsoluteDate` (but it is still
±5.88 millions years for `DateComponents` and `DateTimeComponents` as they use primitive
int for the day offset with respect to J2000.0). The fractional part within the second is what
was changed: it is now also stored as non-negative primitive long with fixed precision at a
resolution of one attosecond ($10^{-18}s$). The choice of attoseconds allows to represent
exactly all important offsets (between TT and TAI, or between UTC and TAI during the linear
eras), as well as all times converted from standard java `Instant`, `Date` or `TimeUnit` classes.
It also allows simple computation as adding or subtracting two values in attoseconds that are
less than one second does not overflow (a primitive long could hold any values between ±9.22s
in attoseconds so simple additions and subtractions followed by handling a carry to bring the
value back between $0$ and $10^{18}$ is straightforward). The workhorse of the new implementation
is the `SplitTime` class that contains a time split into seconds and attoseconds. This new class
is therefore much more accurate than the previous one (attoseconds rather than femtoseconds) and
more importantly more robust, much simpler as it does not have to deal with IEEE-754 and
decimal-friendly. Provisions have been made to still handle `NaN`, and ±∞ (both in computation,
parsing and writing).

Many methods that used primitive double to represent durations or offsets have been rewritten
to take `SplitTime` instances as arguments or to generate them as return values. This affects
the API of classes `AbsoluteDate`, `TimeComponents`, `DateTimeComponents`, `GNSSDate`, `OffsetModel`
`UTCTAIOffset` and their field counterparts for the classes that have one, as well as the `TimeScale`
and `TimeShiftable` interfaces and all their implementations. In most cases, the methods taking a
primitive double as an argument have been kept, and they delegate to a new method that creates a
`SplitTime` instance on the fly from the double. Methods that returned a primitive double have
sometimes been kept (for example `durationFrom` in `AbsoluteDate` is still there) but a sister method
has been created to take advantage of the new implementation with increased accuracy (so there is now
a `splitDurationFrom` method in `AbsoluteDate`). Some methods that returned a primitive double have
been changed and now return `SplitTime` instances, this is in particular the case of all the methods
in the `TimeScale` interface.

As these changes were made, it appeared the `AggregatedPVCoordinatesProvider` class threw
`OrekitIllegalArgumentException` and `IllegalStateException` instead of `OrekitException` when
an out-of-range date was used, which make them more difficult to catch. This has been changed too.

### how to adapt existing source code
Despite the change is a revamp of the most widely used class in Orekit (`AbsoluteDate`), many
efforts have been put to preserve the public API as much as possible. Many methods using
primitive double or providing primitive double are still there. One big exception to this
is the `TimeScale` interface, which now only uses `SplitTime` instances. As most users just
use the time scales as opaque objects when reading/writing dates, they should not be affected
too much. In any case, they can still continue using primitive double by wrapping them in or
out of `SplitTime` instances, replacing calls like `timeScale.offsetFromTAI(date)` by
`timeScale.offsetFromTAI(date).toDouble()`. On the other hand, if they need to call a method
that needs a `SplitTime` and they only have a primitive double, wrapping is done by replacing
calls like `object.someMethod(offset)` by `object.someMethod(new SplitTime(offset))`.

Custom implementations of `TimeShiftable` could be updated to take advantage of the new
`shiftedBy(SplitTime)` method, but it is not required as there is a default implementation that
delegates to the original `shiftedBy(double)` method.

If some user code breaks due to API changes, though, it is recommended to avoid using the
wrapping between primitive double and `SplitTime`. What is recommended is to take the
opportunity to remove entirely the primitive double and generalize use of `SplitTime`
everywhere. This will increase both accuracy of computation and robustness.

Avoiding primitive double also applies to parsing and to literal constants in models or
non-regression test input data. When parsing a text like "3.2184e+01" from a `String field`
variable, instead of using `new SplitTime(Double.parseDouble(field))` one should rather
use `SplitTime.parse(field)`. The rationale is that `SplitTime.parse` preserves decimals
because it will parse the "3" and "2184" parts separately, apply the exponent and split
that into an exact 32 seconds part and an exact 184 milliseconds part, whereas the double
parsing will be slightly off as IEEE754 cannot represent this number exactly. The
small parsing error will show up when printing the value back to text. When using literal
constants in source code (say for example 32.184 as before, which is the offset between
TT and TAI) then rather than using `new SplitTime(32.184)`, users should use the linear
combinations constructors as in `new SplitTime(32, SplitTime.SECOND, 184, SplitTime.MILLISECOND)`.
There are such linear combinations constructors from 1 to 5 terms and the multiplicative
factors can be long integers.

The static method `TimeComponents.fromSecond` intended to finely tune construction of dates
within a leap second occurrence has been replaced by a public constructor taking a single
`SplitTime` argument instead of its first two arguments.

In the `OffsetModel` class, the units for slopes in UTC-TAI linear models used prior to 1972
were changed from seconds per day to nanoseconds per UTC second (despite neither is a SI unit),
as looking at the values shows these slopes were in fact simple numbers (only three different
slopes were used between 1961 and 1972: 15ns/s, 13ns/s and 30ns/s). The offset has also been
changed from double to `SplitTime` to allow representing exactly the microseconds offsets used
in linear models before 1972. As the `UTCTAIOffset` and `OffsetModel` classes are mainly
intended to implement UTC-TAI loaders and Orekit already provides loaders for the major formats,
this should not affect many users. For those users who did implement custom loaders that take
old slopes and double offsets into account, they should scale the slopes by changing their
parsing code from `double slope = Double.parseDouble(field)` to
`int slope = (int) (SplitTime.parse(field).getAttoSeconds() / SLOPE_FACTOR` were `SLOPE_FACTOR`
is defined as `long SLOPE_FACTOR = 86400L * 1000000000L`; and then build the offset by using
this integer slope in nanoseconds per UTC seconds. Using `SplitTime.parse` instead of
`Double.parseDouble` avoids numerical noise as parsing is done in decimal.

If users caught `OrekitIllegalArgumentException` and `IllegalStateException` when using
`AggregatedPVCoordinatesProvider`, they must now catch `OrekitException` to recover from out-of-range
dates.

As dates resolution is now always exactly one attosecond, when using `shitftedBy` to set up a date just
before of after another date (for example to set up a transition in a `TimeSpanMap`), the recommended
shift value is either `SplitTime.ATTOSECOND` or `SplitTime.ATTOSECOND.negate()`. Using `Double.MIN_VALUE`
won't work (in fact it only worked in previous versions when the date was exactly at a TAI second, i.e.
when the offset was exactly 0.0).

## Signal time of flight endpoints adjustment

### overview of the change
In 12.X series, the `signalTimeOfFlight` method assumed the signal was received at
a known fixed date, but was emitted at an earlier unknown date that is estimated.
In some cases (typically in GNSS where signals are generated by atomic clocks),
it is the emission date that is perfectly known and it is the later arrival time
that should be estimated.

The `signalTimeOfFlight` method was therefore renamed `signalTimeOfFlightAdjustableEmitter`
and new `signalTimeOfFlightAdjustableReceiver` methods with various signatures
were added in 13.0.

### how to adapt existing source code
The change is straightforward. Users only have to replace calls to `signalTimeOfFlight`
by calls to `signalTimeOfFlightAdjustableEmitter`.
